# Chapter 05: Prototypes

## Notes

## `[[Prototype]]`

1. It is possible to create an object to have an empty `[[prototype]]`, though this is somewhat less common.

2. ES6 Proxies can change default `[[Get]]` and `[[Put]]` behaviors.

consider this:

```js
var anotherObject = {
  a: 2
};

var myObject = Object.create(anotherObject);
```

3. If `a` did not found on `myObject` then default `[[Get]]` operation proceeds to follow the `[[Prototype]]` link. So, we have `myObject` that is now `[[Prototype]]` linked to `anotherObject`.

4. If `a` weren't found on `anotherObject` either, it `[[Prototype]]` chain, if non-empty is again consulted and followed.

5. This process continues untill either a matching property is found, or the `[[Prototype]]` chain ends.

6. If no matching property is ever found on the `[[Prototype]]` chain, the result from the `[[Get]]` operation is `undefined`.

7. The `for...in` loop iterate over `[[Prototype]]` chain which are `enumarable`.

8. If you use `in` operator to check the existanc of a property if will check entire chain of the object (regardless of _enumarability_)

### `Object.prototype`

9. The top-end of every _normal_ `[[Prototype]]` chain is `Object.prototype`.

### Setting & Shadowing Properties

consider this:

```js
myObject.foo = 'bar';
```

10. If propety name `foo` ends up both on `myObject` and higher in the `[[Prototype]]` chain that starts at `myObject` this is called _shadowing_. The `foo` property on `myObject` _shadows_ the `foo` property on the `[[Prototype]]` chain. To understand the nuances of property accessor consider three scenarios.

    1. If `foo` is not present on `myObject` but higher on prototype chain **not marked as read-only `(writeable: false)`** then new property `foo` added to `myObject`.

    2. If `foo` is not present on `myObject` but higher on prototype chain **with read-only `(writable: false)`** then both existing property and shadowing property **are disallowed**. In `strict mode` error will be thrown otherwise silently fails.

    3. If `foo` found higer on the `[[Prototype]]` chain and it's a setter then setter will always be called. No shadowing occure and nor will `foo` setter be redefined.

11. If we want to add `foo` in cases #2 and #3 then we can not use `=` operator, but must instead use `Object.defineProperty(..)` to add `foo` to `myObject`.

#### Be awaire from implicit shadowing

```js
var anotherObject = {
  a: 2
};

var myObject = Object.create(anotherObject);

anotherObject.a; // 2
myObject.a; // 2

anotherObject.hasOwnProperty('a'); // true
myObject.hasOwnProperty('a'); // false

myObject.a++; // oops, implicit shadowing!

anotherObject.a; // 2
myObject.a; // 3

myObject.hasOwnProperty('a'); // true
```
