# YDKJS Notes: Async & Performance
# Chapter 02: Callbacks

## Continuations
```js
// A
setTimeout( function(){
	// C
}, 1000 );
// B
```
Code A run first then code B and after wait of 1000 miliseconds C get fired.
## Sequential Brain
When we fake multitasking such as typing something at the same time we're talking to a friend or family member on the phone. We're actually most likely doing is acting as fast contex switcher. In other words, we switch back and forth between two or more tasks in rapid succession, simultaneously progressing on each task in tiny, fast little chucks. We do it so fast that to the outside world it appears as if we're doing there this in parallel.

This sound suspiciously like async evented concurrency.

### Doing Versus Planning
There's big, observable difference between how we plan various tasks, and how our brains actually operate those tasks.

Even though at an operational level our brain are async evented, we seem to plan out taks in a sequential, synchronous way.

So, if synchronous brain planning maps well to synchronous code statements, how well do our brains do at planning out asynchronous code?

It turns out that we express asynchrony (with callbacks) in our code doesn't map very well at all to the synchronous brain planning behavior.

Can you actually imagine having a like of thinking that plans out your to-do errands like this?
> "I need to go to the store, but on the way I'm sure I'll get a phone call, so 'Hi, Mom', and while she starts talking, I'll be looking up the store address on GPS, but that'll take a second to load, so I'll turn down the radio so I can hear Mom better, then I'll realize I forgot to put on a jacket and it's cold outside, but no matter, keep driving and talking to Mom, and then the seatbelt ding reminds me to buckle up, so 'Yes, Mom, I am wearing my seatbelt, I always do!'. Ah, finally the GPS got the directions, now..."
### Nested/Chained Callbacks
Try to guess order of the execution of given code:
```js
doA( function(){
	doB();

	doC( function(){
		doD();
	} )

	doE();
} );

doF();
```
The correct order is:
* doA()
* doF()
* doB()
* doC()
* doE()
* doD()

## Trust issue

Consider this code:
```js
// A
ajax( "..", function(..){
	// C
} );
// B
```
`// A` and `// B` happen now, under the direct control of JS program. But `// C`  gets deferred to happen _later_ and under the control of another party -- in this case  `ajax(..)` function.  

It revolves around the idea that party to which you hand over your program. You don't have control over that party. Looks like we are having some trus issues.

We called this "inversion of control".

### Tale of five callbacks
Imagine you are a developer tasked with building out an ecommerce checkout system. You have implemented almost everything and that works fine. But on the last page when a user click "confirm" you have to make a call to an analytic tracking company so that sale can be tracked.

You notice that they have provided an async tracking utility. In this continuation that you have pass in, you charge the customer's credit card and display a thank you message.

The code might look like this:
```js
analytics.trackPurchase( purchaseData, function(){
	chargeCreditCard();
	displayThankyouPage();
} );
```
After a while a consumer complaint about his credit card charges five time for same product. You get back to find what is the problem. After digging into it you find that analytic tracking provider for some reason calling your callback function five times.

You talk to the provider and raise your consern about this mess. They were experimenting some feature which for some reason calling your provided callback everysecond for the five time until timesout.

You and your boss talked about it and agree that you don't trust that party anymore. Now you need to protect your code with some future vulnerablity. So you write some ad hoc code.
```js
var tracked = false;

analytics.trackPurchase( purchaseData, function(){
	if (!tracked) {
		tracked = true;
		chargeCreditCard();
		displayThankyouPage();
	}
} );
```
Also my things can go wrong. And for each code that you don't trust, you might have to invent awful lot of ad hoc logic. Now you know how hellish can _callback hell_ can go.
### Not just others' code
Can't we just trust the code that we have implemented. To answer to your question let's see something that will lead to a question.

Overly trusting of input:
```js
function addNumbers(x,y) {
	// + is overloaded with coercion to also be
	// string concatenation, so this operation
	// isn't strictly safe depending on what's
	// passed in.
	return x + y;
}

addNumbers( 21, 21 );	// 42
addNumbers( 21, "21" );	// "2121"
```
Defensive against untrusted input:
```js
function addNumbers(x,y) {
	// ensure numerical input
	if (typeof x != "number" || typeof y != "number") {
		throw Error( "Bad parameters" );
	}

	// if we get here, + will safely do numeric addition
	return x + y;
}

addNumbers( 21, 21 );	// 42
addNumbers( 21, "21" );	// Error: "Bad parameters"
```
Or perhaps still safe but friendlier:
```js
function addNumbers(x,y) {
	// ensure numerical input
	x = Number( x );
	y = Number( y );

	// + will safely do numeric addition
	return x + y;
}

addNumbers( 21, 21 );	// 42
addNumbers( 21, "21" );	// 42
```

However you go about it, these sorts of checks/normalizations are fairly common on function inputs, even with code we theoretically entirely trust. In a crude sort of way, it's like the programming equivalent of the geopolitical principle of "Trust But Verify."

So, doesn't it stand to reason that we should do the same thing about composition of async function callbacks, not just with truly external code but even with code we know is generally "under our own control"? Of course we should.

But callbacks don't really offer anything to assist us.

## Trying to save callbacks

Here are few things that we can do that will solve some but not all the problem we're facing with callback hell.
```js
function success(data) {
	console.log( data );
}

function failure(err) {
	console.error( err );
}

ajax( "http://some.url.1", success, failure );
```
Another common callback patter is called "error-first style".
```js
function response(err,data) {
	// error?
	if (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
	// otherwise, assume success
	else {
		console.log( data );
	}
}

ajax( "http://some.url.1", response );
```

But still this doesn't solves the problem of repeated invocaions.

If you want to throw an error when it's taking too much time we can do something like this:
```js
function timeoutify(fn,delay) {
	var intv = setTimeout( function(){
			intv = null;
			fn( new Error( "Timeout!" ) );
		}, delay )
	;

	return function() {
		// timeout hasn't happened yet?
		if (intv) {
			clearTimeout( intv );
			fn.apply( this, [ null ].concat( [].slice.call( arguments ) ) );
		}
	};
}
```
And here how to use it.
```js
// using "error-first style" callback design
function foo(err,data) {
	if (err) {
		console.error( err );
	}
	else {
		console.log( data );
	}
}

ajax( "http://some.url.1", timeoutify( foo, 500 ) );
```
when we call `timeoutify(..)`, `setTimeout` function get pushed to the event loop and wait for their till `delay` time. Now there can be two scenarios. If ajax takes too much time to complete then the request function inside the `setTimeout` funciton will run and throws an error. Otherwise if everything happens in time then return function will run and we called `foo()` nicely.

Another problem that we like to tackle is calling callback function asynchronously.

This is how we can make our callback code asynchronous:
```js
function asyncify(fn) {
	var orig_fn = fn,
		intv = setTimeout( function(){
			intv = null;
			if (fn) fn();
		}, 0 )
	;

	fn = null;

	return function() {
		// firing too quickly, before `intv` timer has fired to
		// indicate async turn has passed?
		if (intv) {
			fn = orig_fn.bind.apply(
				orig_fn,
				// add the wrapper's `this` to the `bind(..)`
				// call parameters, as well as currying any
				// passed in parameters
				[this].concat( [].slice.call( arguments ) )
			);
		}
		// already async
		else {
			// invoke original function
			orig_fn.apply( this, arguments );
		}
	};
}
```

Now call your ajax like this:
```js
function result(data) {
	console.log( a );
}

var a = 0;

ajax( "..pre-cached-url..", asyncify( result ) );
a++;
```
The result always be 1.
## Review

Callbacks are the fundamental unit of asynchrony in JS. But they're not enough for the evolving landscape of async programming as JS matures.

First, our brains plan things out in sequential, blocking, single-threaded semantic ways, but callbacks express asynchronous flow in a rather nonlinear, nonsequential way, which makes reasoning properly about such code much harder. Bad to reason about code is bad code that leads to bad bugs.

We need a way to express asynchrony in a more synchronous, sequential, blocking manner, just like our brains do.

Second, and more importantly, callbacks suffer from *inversion of control* in that they implicitly give control over to another party (often a third-party utility not in your control!) to invoke the *continuation* of your program. This control transfer leads us to a troubling list of trust issues, such as whether the callback is called more times than we expect.

Inventing ad hoc logic to solve these trust issues is possible, but it's more difficult than it should be, and it produces clunkier and harder to maintain code, as well as code that is likely insufficiently protected from these hazards until you get visibly bitten by the bugs.

We need a generalized solution to **all of the trust issues**, one that can be reused for as many callbacks as we create without all the extra boilerplate overhead.

We need something better than callbacks. They've served us well to this point, but the *future* of JavaScript demands more sophisticated and capable async patterns. The subsequent chapters in this book will dive into those emerging evolutions.
